---
layout: post
title: Blocking - Ship Blocker. 
---
Imagine you have an extreme distaste for me (while, maybe you do, though I don't understand why you're reading my blog). Would you like me to be able to follow along with the posts you share to your friends on social media? No? Me neither. 

I enjoy using social features on apps and sites to connect with people I know. I love seeing books friends are reading on Goodreads, I like getting new music from checking out what my friends are listening to on Spotify, going up against my pals in Fitbit challenges, and of course I have an extremely soft spot for Pinterest. The list goes on; most of the online applications I use on a regular basis include some sort of social feature.

Apps make it so easy to connect with friends - a "log in with Facebook" option, maybe, or perhaps by crawling your email contact list. A few taps of a button and all of your friends with an account are there. It's pretty cool!

Unfortunately, it can't end there. Like many people, people who I once considered my friends simply aren't anymore and I would no longer like them to be able to access my shared information, nor would I like to see theirs. 
Bewilderingly, many sites do not have a comprehensive blocking feature. 

>How is this not a ship blocker?

For example, I deleted my old LinkedIn account for a few years on account of some threatening interactions from a user. I contacted customer support since I couldn't readily find a "block" option, and they told me that it was not an option and I should just ignore it. I had no choice but to delete my account entirely. Thankfully, LinkedIn has since implemented a blocking feature and you can <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/pub/michelle-bergeron/bb/89b/99b">find me there again</a>.

Spotify allows me to block messaging from a user, but that user can still follow my playlists. What if I don't want the user to know my personal music tastes? Spotify has an "all or nothing" approach to privacy - either your playlist is private to only yourself or it's public. No intermediate "friends only" or "public except for blocked users" sort of deal. It's a frustrating design choice that has me thinking about switching to a different music service. 

The "totally public or totally private" paradigm works for some services; a key example being <a href="https://github.com/mrb113">Github</a>. Github is not predominantly a social site, used to post code and manage open-source projects, but you can still block individual users! If Github can justify having a block option, so can every other site with a "totally public vs. totally private" setup. 

Most apps use Facebook connect to find your friends during initial setup and that's it - they prefer to use their own user management system. This is fine; requires a little more work on my end to go through and manage my friends on multiple sites, but I think it's a reasonable thing to do. I do not appreciate when I block a user on Facebook and am unable to block them on a separate site that found that individual from my Facebook friends list prior to blocking them. 

If you are working on an app with a social feature, a block option seems like a tempting candidate to cut until a further release (or never). 
Social should never come without blocking. I'd argue that blocking is an integral part of the social feature itself. Blocking - don't ship without it.